Shooby feb (#225)
fornax-navo/fornax-demo-notebooks: light_curves/ML_AGNzoo.md

    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.0
kernelspec:
  display_name: root *
  language: python
  name: conda-root-py
---

# How do AGNs selected with different techniques compare?

By the IPAC Science Platform Team, last edit: Feb 13th, 2024

***

## Learning Goals

```
By the end of this tutorial, you will:

- Work with multi-band lightcurve data
- Learn high dimensional manifold of light curves with UMAPs and SOMs
- Visualize and compare different samples on reduced dimension projections/grids
```

## Introduction

> Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs), some of the most powerful sources in the universe, emit a broad range of electromagnetic radiation, from radio waves to gamma rays. Consequently, there is a wide variety of AGN labels depending on the identification/selection scheme and the presence or absence of certain emissions (e.g., Radio loud/quiet, Quasars, Blazars, Seiferts, Changing looks). According to the unified model, this zoo of labels we see depend on a limited number of parameters, namely the viewing angle, the accretion rate, presence or lack of jets, and perhaps the properties of the host/environment (e.g., [Padovani et al. 2017](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.07134.pdf)). Here, we collect archival temporal data and labels from the literature to compare how some of these different labels/selection schemes compare.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs), some of the most powerful sources in the universe, emit a broad range of electromagnetic radiation, from radio waves to gamma rays. Consequently, there is a wide variety of AGN labels depending on the identification/selection scheme and the presence or absence of certain emissions (e.g., Radio loud/quiet, Quasars, Blazars, Seiferts, Changing looks). According to the unified model, this zoo of labels we see depend on a limited number of parameters, namely the viewing angle, the accretion rate, presence or lack of jets, and perhaps the properties of the host/environment (e.g., [Padovani et al. 2017](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.07134.pdf)). Here, we collect archival photometry and labels from the literature to compare how some of these different labels/selection schemes compare.
```

> We use manifold learning and dimensionality reduction to learn the distribution of AGN lightcurves observed with different facilities. We mostly focus on UMAP ([Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection, McInnes 2020](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.03426.pdf)) but also show SOM ([Self organizing Map, Kohonen 1990](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/58325)) examples. The reduced 2D projections from these two unsupervised ML techniques reveal similarities and overlaps of different selection techniques and coloring the projections with various statistical physical properties (e.g., mean brightness, fractional lightcurve variation) is informative of correlations of the selections technique with physics such as AGN variability. Using different parts of the EM in training (or in building the initial higher dimensional manifold) demonstrates how much information if any is in that part of the data for each labeling scheme, for example whether with ZTF optical light curves alone, we can identify sources with variability in WISE near IR bands. These techniques also have a potential for identifying targets of a specific class or characteristic for future follow up observations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use manifold learning and dimensionality reduction to learn the distribution of AGN lightcurves observed with different facilities. We mostly focus on UMAP ([Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection, McInnes 2020](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.03426.pdf)) but also show SOM ([Self organizing Map, Kohonen 1990](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/58325)) examples. The reduced 2D projections from these two unsupervised ML techniques reveal similarities and overlaps of different selection techniques.  Coloring the projections with various statistical physical properties (e.g., mean brightness, fractional light curve variation) is informative of correlations of the selections technique with physics such as AGN variability. Using different parts of the EM in training (or in building the initial higher dimensional manifold) demonstrates how much information if any is in that part of the data for each labeling scheme, for example whether with ZTF optical light curves alone, we can identify sources with variability in WISE near IR bands. These techniques also have a potential for identifying targets of a specific class or characteristic for future follow up observations.
```

from ML_utils import unify_lc, unify_lc_gp, stat_bands, autopct_format, combine_bands,\
mean_fractional_variation, normalize_mean_objects, normalize_max_objects, \
normalize_clipmax_objects, shuffle_datalabel, dtw_distance, stretch_small_values_arctan, translate_bitwise_sum_to_labels, update_bitsums
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
from collections import Counter,OrderedDict

import umap
from sompy import * #using the SOMPY package from https://github.com/sevamoo/SOMPY

import logging

# Get the root logger
logger = logging.getLogger()
logger.setLevel(logging.ERROR)

import warnings
warnings.filterwarnings('ignore')

plt.style.use('bmh')
colors = [
    "#3F51B5",  # Ultramarine Blue
    "#003153",  # Prussian Blue
    "#0047AB",  # Cobalt Blue
    "#40826D",  # Viridian Green
    "#50C878",  # Emerald Green
    "#FFEA00",  # Chrome Yellow
    "#CC7722",  # Yellow Ochre
    "#E34234",  # Vermilion
    "#E30022",  # Cadmium Red
    "#D68A59",  # Raw Sienna
    "#8A360F",  # Burnt Sienna
    "#826644",  # Raw Umber
]

custom_cmap = LinearSegmentedColormap.from_list("custom_theme", colors[1:])
```

***

## 1) Loading data

> Here we load a parquet file of light curves generated using the multiband_lc notebook. One can build the sample from different sources in the literature and grab the data from archives of interes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we load a parquet file of light curves generated using the light_curve_generator notebook in this same GitHub repo. With that light_curve_generator notebook, you can build your favorite sample from different sources in the literature and grab the data from archives of interest.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
#sample_table = Table.read('data/agnsample_feb7.ecsv', format="ascii.ecsv") # if needed, contains coordinates, redshift and all labels
df = pd.read_parquet('data/df_lc_020724.parquet.gzip')

> df2 = df[df.index.get_level_values('label') != '64'] # remove 64 for SPIDER only as its too large

Reviewer: Somewhere above this line you should describe what you are doing with the bitwise sums so that "removing 64" has a meaning.

> df_lc = update_bitsums(df2) # remove all bitwise sums that had 64 in them

Author: I am always worried of overwriting and never really thought of RAM, thanks.

The unify_lc, or unify_lc_gp functions do the unification of the lightcurve arrays. For details please see the codes. The time arrays are chosen based on the average duration of observations, with ZTF and WISE covering 1600, 4000 days respectively. We note that we disregard the time of observation of each source, by subtracting the initial time from the array and bringing all lightcurves to the same footing. This has to be taken into account if it influences the science of interest. We then interoplate the time arrays with linear or Gaussian Process regression (unift_lc/ unify_lc_gp respectively). We also remove from the sample objects with less than 5 datapoints in their light curve. We measure basic statistics and combine the tree observed ZTF bands into one longer array as input to dimensionailty reduction after deciding on normalization. We also do a shuffling of the sample to be sure that the separations of different classes by ML are not simply due to the order they are seen in training (in case it is not done by the ML routine itself).

> ```{code-cell} ipython3

Reviewer 2: This cell appears to make several copies of the data. If the dataframe is large, this may use up a lot of RAM. If you want to save RAM, consider whether it is really necessary to keep all of them.
